Hi, this is Scott. I
really appreciate our sponsors because
they make the show possible.
Today's show is sponsored by
developer express, become a UI
superhero with dev express controls
and libraries. Deliver elegant.net solutions
that address customer needs today
by leveraging your existing knowledge,
you can build next generation
touch enabled solutions for tomorrow,
you can download your free
30 day trial@dxdothanselminutes.com. That's dx.hanselminutes.com.
Hi, this is Scott Hanselman.
This is another episode of
Hansel minutes today. I'm talking
with Alena hall. She's formerly
a software engineer at Microsoft
research. She works on Azure
and big data and loves
functional programming and all kinds
of distributed systems. And I'm
happy to be talking with
you today. How are you?
Good. Thank you, Scott. How
are you? I am great.
We're doing this over the
holiday season, which means that
we probably need to spend
more time. Now. We are
Merry Christmas, everyone Merry Christmas
to you, but we have
a lot of fun working
on this kind of stuff.
So you're a lot like
me. You just can't stop
cause you have so much
fun. Right? Right. I'm very
naturally curious first. And so
I like to discover new
things and learn them during
the holiday season and every
time. So I'm a big
fan of functional programming and
distributed systems. You, I met
you. Gosh, it's been several
years now, but I've always
thought of you as a
functional person, but I don't.
Did you start out functional?
I did not. I think
we've met at that net
fringe 2015 first in Portland.
And I was giving a
talk about F sharp and
embrace framework, which is a
framework for cloud computations in
a functional way. And at
that point I was doing
functional programming already for a
few years, but I started
as a Java and C
sharp engineers. So I, I
did have to break my
mind and go into functional
programming from object oriented background.
But in 2015, you know,
when you were actually on
the board of the F
sharp software foundation, you said
you were already thinking about
functional for a few years.
When you did your master's
degree, were you doing functional?
Were you writing Haskell and
things like that? So Scala
and F sharp were my
first functional programming languages. And
I have decided to learn
them to just understand functional
programming in general, because previously
I've just been exposed to
languages like Java and C
sharp. And of course it
definitely broke my mind. At
first, nothing seemed intuitive for
the first few weeks, but
as I got through the
concept, sometimes reading the same
article or chapter of the
book, 10 times I came
to find that actually some
of the concepts are more
intuitive than it seemed at
first. Yes, they were different
from those that I've been
used to. And that's why
it was hard at first
to wrap my head around
them. But in general they
make sense. So yeah, I've
used them during my masters
too. Do you, are you
familiar of course with the
keyboard? Yeah, I am.
Are you a direct person?
So I feel like I've
got a buddy, you know,
Phil hack and he's, he's
always telling me that I
should switch to  and
he always tells me, it'll
break your mind for a
few weeks and then it'll
be, then it'll be this
glorious, wondrous future. Like, and
you'll, you know, you'll be
living in a parallel universe,
like, like Neo in the
matrix is functional. I have
a feeling that this is
something similar. I have not
tried this keyword, but I
agree that yes, at first,
when you are exposed to
any new concept like this
with previous experience in a
different world, it will change
your world view. And at
first you will try to
program using foreign wild loops
and assignments of mutual variables,
but mutable variables. But then
you realize that, okay, this
is not how I should
think about it. I should
think about it as data
pipelines and transformations and not
actually assigning something to a
variable, but having values that
then return other values and
having small set of functions
that sometimes you have to
use some explicit, explicit wrapper
around side effects so that
your program knows how to
handle them and how to
communicate with the external world
correctly. So, yeah, so functional
programming is just a different
abstraction from the foundation up
and it goes in parallel
with this imperative programming world
and Tulsa can be used
for general purpose programming. What
do you feel about the
relationship between, and I'll just
use these two languages, C
sharp and F sharp. Is
it a competition or is
it just no brothers and
sisters or step-brothers or do
you think that there are,
are there F sharp people
that just think that F
sharp should, and I've forgive
me for using this word
should win. I feel like
they're a preference. Basically people
can prefer one or another,
but I feel like C-sharp
is slowly taking some of
the features of, of sharp
into itself. So like pattern
matching, I feel like it's
slowly taken, it's taking this
feature into a C sharp.
So a sharp seems cleaner
to me. It, me discover
bugs really much more quick
than in C-sharp. We basically,
I can build prototypes in
a sharp, not depending on
what language I finally will
implement the production solution with.
I've heard many stories that
people who are using, for
example, Java for their production
solution still implement the first
initial prototyping of sharp, because
yes, because it's much easier
to first build out your
logic and specify all the
possible outcomes and basically make
sure that you're building what
you really should be building.
Interesting. Do, do you feel
that the moved of F
sharp recently to support like
dotnet corn.net standard? I sure
that's all a good thing,
right? This is definitely a
good thing. And I think
this brings a sharp into
more wide usage compared to
previous years, because like right
now I'm, I have a
Mac and I'm using, I
have sharp with mano on
it, and I can, I
use a sharp Kubernetes in
my services. So I'm working
with it like an open
source language, and basically I
can interact with any open
source technology with no limitations.
So I feel like that
net core support is the
next step in this process
too. And it kind of
seems like a natural place
for the F sharp community
because, you know, net people
and F and C sharp
people are, are, are open
source and becoming more open
source, but F sharp people
feel like they've always been
very intensely focused on open
source. So for the ability
for F sharp to interact
with other open source distributed
systems is super important. And
I know there's a bunch
of distributed systems and technologies
that you're interested in. Yes,
I am currently working with
a lot of distributed systems
technology like Cassandra spark Kafka,
and I'm using a sharp
sharpened scholar to and direct
with his technologist. So, yeah.
What are the, what are
some of the technologies that
you've plugged F sharp into
and been surprised that it
worked so well? For example,
Cassandra SIM simply when you
were creating the Cassandra cluster,
first thing that comes to
your mind, okay, so you
can use Java or Scala
with Cassandra because they have
basically a native support in
the Cassandra driver. But as
you may discover, a sharp
is also supported. And then
I just tried to check
how smooth is the support
and whether everything works. And
I've discovered that it's really
easy to do that. And
it's very smooth. There are
no issues in my recent
demos at cube con in
December in Austin, I was
showing basically how to write
F sharp jobs to run
on Cassandra, to populate your
Cassandra cluster that is running
on Kubernetes with stateful sets.
So it's really amazing to
see that everything works together,
functional programming, distributed systems, containers.
A lot of people are
watching all of this happen
from the outside. They might
be working on, you know,
dot net three or.net for
maybe their company works a
little bit more slowly. They're
not thinking about containers and
they might be a little
bit overwhelmed, frankly, and feeling
like, well, I'll try Kubernetes
or I'll play with it
on the weekend, and then
I'll play with something else
the next week. And by
then it's already changed. Do
you think things are moving
too fast? They are definitely
moving. They're moving fast, but
I feel like it's natural
evolution of technology. And at
some point, I mean, when
technology becomes more popular, you
have to look at it
because it might be the
next standard. So I feel
like Kubernetes is becoming the
next standard for services for
running distributed systems that you
build on top of it.
So if your application is
based on old standards, that
works good, it's fine. But
if your application needs to
be more distributed, you should
definitely look into Kubernedes and
see what benefits you can
get using it, because it
supports many of the things
that previously we needed to
think about implementing manually. Like
if you ever have a
service that needs to be
replicated and always available, you
can easily indicate this parameters
in your configuration, and Kubernedes
will make sure that your
services scheduled to run exactly
this many instances and recover
any failures that can occur
in the meantime. And many
other features. You know, you
probably know that I've been
learning about Kubernetes over the
last year, and I've been
doing some stuff with raspberry
pies. And a couple of
weeks ago, I had Alex Ellis
on he's a Docker captain,
and he's a big fan
of using Kubernetes on, on
raspberry pies and, you know,
learning about it kind of
in my own little lab.
But, and then I did
of course, some stuff in
Azure, but one of the
things that I realized that
a lot of us short
doing kind of hello, world
demos and learning about the
basics of Kubernetes are doing
is we're kind of ignoring
the database. Yeah. Because it's
tricky because previously just like
a year ago, we didn't
have the stateful sets, which
is a concept in Kubernetes
that allows you to run
stateful applications. Right now we
have this concept and it
really simplifies how we manage
storage with Kubernetes. So we
can, we can, of course,
Mount a persistent volume that
Stateville sets help us with
automating all of this under,
underneath. And we just define
our template with the persistent
volume claim. And it manages
all the mounting automatically and
make sure that if something
happens, it will remounted. And
you can specify settings to
make sure that let's say,
if you have multiple instances
of the application, that none
of them are scheduled on
the same node, because it
might be not really reliable.
So actually in my demo,
it was showing exactly that
when I deployed Sandra on
Kubernedes and mounted Azure disks
to it, manage discs and
showed how, if something happens
to a container, it reads
it restarts, and then data
is not lost. So basically
it helps us to manage
this state. Maybe you could
help me better understand stateful
sets. I've heard that number
of times. You've said it
a couple of times, and
I still don't quite understand
what, how that relates, like
which part of my app
is supposed to be totally
stateless and to be fired
up and shut down instantly.
And then whether a stateful
set is going to make
my site less likely to
scale. I see what you
mean. So containers in general
are when you think about
containers, they're basically meant as
stateless services. When we have
some sort of important information
that we can't just, we
can't allow to be lost,
we must have some sort
of persistent storage, because if
something happens to pod, everything
can happen. It can die.
We will lose our state
with usual deployment or replica
set in Kubernetes. So we
have to have persistent volumes
attached and manage our state,
manage, manage our data in
the stateful way. So Kubernetes
has this concept of storage
class that you can choose
from. So I know that
I've played around with this
on Azure, and it has
managed disks or a file
storage, or some default storage
classes. You can choose what
type of storage you can
have for your pots. And
then in the template definition
of your service, like Cassandra
service, we have an additional
section which is called volume
clean templates. And there, we
indicate that we want each
pod to start with a
mounted storage of the type
of the storage class that
we have chosen. We're all
saying indicating the amount of
storage, some like one gigabytes
or how gigabytes your warrant,
and then when each part
starts up, it requests the
storage ways for it to
be provisioned and attaches it
to the noted resides on.
So basically if something happens
to this container after a
while, the volume will be
remounted and data will be
still there and not lost.
Okay. So let me see
if I can repeat some
of that back to you
and like, paraphrases, can you
tell me if I got
it right? Okay. So if
you're like an administrator or
an it department who is
going to make Kubernetes and
make hardware available to Kubernetes,
you have lots of different
options on how you can
give them a storage. And
the administrator can say, I
have different classes of storage,
different things, and it could
be different speeds or different
quality of service or different
whatever. And I can say,
I've got an Azure disc
available, I've got an unmanaged
Azure disc, I've got whatever.
Okay. And my app might
need different kinds of storage.
Like I might just need
temporary storage, or I might
need super fast storage and
I need you to hold
onto it so that if
I go away, the storage
doesn't go away. Okay. So
then I describe in my,
basically in my, in my
pod that, or in my
district, what's it called? What's
the, where am I describing
this? How am I making
this declaration? There is a
file. You can, you can
have a Yammel file with
a definition of our state
set, where you indicate all
of this parameters. Right. Okay.
So then I'm describing in
there, what I want, and
then persistent volumes can then
say, well, I need this
much space. I need these
ways to talk to it.
I need this class of
storage and I need to
Mount it. And then I
think the term is reclaiming.
Yeah. Yeah. So basically full
Luke, even deeper. What is
happening when we perform the
command cube CTL dash create
dash AF my stateful set
that Yammel, we will start
noticing that. Okay. So there
is the first pod creating
right now. And when we
look into persistent volume claims,
we can also check them
using Kube CTL. We can
do cube, CTL, get a
PVC, which is a persistent
volume claim. We can see
that it starts to get
created. So it's like a
request for storage. And then
after we have the request
for storage, we can look
into persistent volumes, which is
gives to TL, get BV.
And then we will notice
that it is also starting
to be created. As soon
as it's done, our pod
will start pulling the container
image and we'll be ready
and running, and then same
stuff for the next, for
the next pod. And one
of the good things about
stateful set is that all
the pods are created in
order, because for some distributed
systems, it's really important. Like
for Sandra, basically you need
the notes to be aware
of some existing nodes in
the, in the cluster, because
you have to indicate the
seed nodes, which has the
way new nodes can join
the cluster and discover, discover
other nodes. So syphilis says
help with state and with
ordering of creation and deletion
and updates. So that is
really useful When you're creating
these systems like this, when
you're, and you're asking for
storage classes, you're asking for
discs, I've found in all
the clouds. I mean, I
know mostly more about Azure,
but I've found in every
cloud that there's sometimes a
lot of latency. Like you
think you, you're asking for
a real disk, but it's
not real. It's out there
somewhere else on a network
and you're talking over HTTP
or something else. When you
think you're talking to a
real desk, can that be
a problem with scale? Usually
not because for me, my
experience that happens pretty fast.
And you can watch, you
can watch that your followers
are creating pretty quick, and
you can notice them on
Azure, for example, in your
resource group, as actual resource
of data disk. So you
can always check that they're
healthy up and running. And
so I haven't seen this
issue And the, the, the
premier D premium storage it's
quite fast. It feels like
it's a, It does. That's
what I've tried for my
demo managed storage. Yep. And
how long did it take
you to get, you said
news, Cassandra to get that
up and running on Kubernetes
on Azure? Well, I, I
had previous experience with both
Kubernedes and Cassandra. So it,
it took me about, I
think, a few hours to
get this up and running.
So, yeah. Yeah. That's pretty
exciting. Yeah. So does this
mean that is this mean,
and this might be a
silly sentence, but it, can
we start using Kubernetes for
basically anything? Could I take
all kinds of apps that
don't belong in Kubernetes and
put them in Kubernetes and
it'll be just fine? Well,
I would say I've been
trying this for development purposes
because of course there will
be. So when you were
on a production database, our
production system was state. You
expect some sort of performance
from it. So when you
run it on bare metal,
you will, of course have
more speed and you have
for more expectations from it.
The benefit of doing a
distributed database on Kubernetes is
that you can easily get
started with it and you
don't have to, you can
easily remove it. You don't
have to pay for the
service to be running because
it's really hard to create
it and deleted. So when
you have a bare metal
cluster, you will just have
it for your in development,
intestine purposes, and production. And
it's, it's hard to do
everything with it because it's
up and running. You don't
want to touch it. And
it's expensive with Kubernetes. You
have the benefit of spun
this up quickly, being able
to be flexible and get
rid of it at any
moment you want and then
create it very easily. So
you don't have to overpay
for your resources so you
can benefit from it right
now for Devin. Test that
with production. I would probably
wait a little bit because
there are some, there might
be some issues because the
technology is still pretty new
and there are still some
issues on GitHub regarding some
corner cases and edge cases
that are now being worked
on. Yeah. I think the
question that everyone wants to
know is when Kubernetes will
be kind of like stop
moving so fast, because it
always feels like there's just
a couple of little things
that might change from, from
minor, minor, minor point. I
feel like Cabrini does right
now is going through its
stage of growth because everybody
knows is dead. It is
useful. And we still don't
have the ecosystem and standards
in the same way. And,
and the same quality that
we had for VMs and
usual, not containerized applications. So
the community is very vibrant.
And at CubeCon in December,
I was shocked by number
of little projects that are
in Kubernetes ecosystem related to
everything, observability, logging, distributed, tracing,
machine learning, and this all
starts to a fear around
Kubernetes. And I completely agree
that it's hard to keep
track of it, but it
is a necessary stage of
development for a tool that
will finally probably obtain some
sort of stability eventually. So
if we kind of popped
a few things off the
stack and go back to
F sharp and, and functional
programming in your language of
preference, when you take, you
know, Cassandra, which you like
Docker, Azure and Kubernetes, and
then you add F sharp
on top of them, does
does the, the immutable functional
world of F sharp fit
really well into the stateless
and scalable world of, of
Kubernetes. It does fit pretty
well on Cabrini. I can
mix and match languages that
I use on Kubernetes. So
I'm using multiple languages for
my services. I can use
Scala in one service, I've
sharpened and as a service.
So whatever is more suitable
for piece of functionality that
I'm deploying, but I agree
that functional programming is really
fitting into the distributed systems
paradigm as well. And it's
interesting to basically also go
deeper in how Kubernetes is
built and see how scheduling
is made. So full look
into components of Kubernetes ecosystem.
There is an it CD
server, which is like a
key value store, the cluster
database. And then we have
API server that excesses at
CD, we have basically the
controller, is that, is it
like a infinite reconciliation loop
pattern that checks for our
state? That is, that is
we have currently and the
desired state and then compares
it and makes our current
state the same as desired
state and then scheduling pods.
And if we look at
algorithms that are used underneath
in distributed systems, we can
see that a lot of
them are actually functional for
look at Prudential distributed commit
log that Kafka uses, or
that spark uses. We can
see that they're all based
in the concept of immutability
and how two worlds collide
together. That's an interesting point.
Have you seen, I'm sure
you have Julia Evans, Kubernetes zenes
and Yes, I have. I'm
a big fan of her
diagrams, I would say. Yeah,
well, you were, I was
looking at them while you
were describing how, you know,
at CD and just scheduling
and all that kind of
things work. And it definitely,
I would recommend it to
folks when you're listening to
this podcast or when you're
learning about Kubernetes and distributed
systems, Julia Evans, as she is
learning is, is drawing a
lot of these things up
in a very, a very
clever kind of comic book
Xen kind of way, which
is cool. Exactly. So I'm
thinking about F sharp and
the future. I know that
we've got F sharp roadmaps
published from August. We've got
gotten at standard 2.0 coming.
You were saying that functional
programming really lends itself to
this new world. If you
think about micro services or
people are now telling me
that they want even smaller
services, I don't know, Pecos
services or nanoserver is making
a function, a distributed Well,
yeah, people are, are trying
to experiment with the amount
of code they've put into
services. And I see that
functions are becoming pretty popular
when you want to have
some event trigger and trigger
an execution of a function
like you can use Azure
functions or AWS Lambda, and
if sharp is supported. So
it was one of the
first languages that was supported
by these tools. So you
have many options to do
that. Have you looked at
open, fast, open FAA functions
as a service? A couple
of weeks ago, like I
mentioned, we had Alex Ellis and
he's basically making like, it's
like Azure functions, except it's
open it's its own, it's
his own Azure functions. And
then we've also seen Azure
functions, runtime released. So you
could go and run the
Azure functions, runtime on another
cloud as a container if
you want it. That sounds
cool. I also see a
lot of, a lot of
technologists shift into streaming and
stream processing. So we have
IOT devices and various devices
that have sensors or anything
similar to that. And they
have a lot of data.
So I have noticed that
use of technologies like Kafka
and spark streaming increased traumatically
in the last few years,
the kids there is a
need to gather data from
various sources and they can
come in with different speed.
They can be produced from
different producers. And then we
have multiple consumers that are
independent of each other, and
we need to somehow manage
the two parts of this
process producing and consuming. We
need the thing between layer
to be durable because anything
can happen to these events.
So I've noticed a big
increase of usage in technologies
like Kafka and spark streaming,
where basically, so I've tried
it on Azure, on HD
insight and data bricks, and
it works amazing. And it
basically integrates with a lot
of existing tools. So just
another, another trend that appears
to be popular. So doing
something like Kafka and that's
K F K, and people
can go and check it
out@kafkadotapache.org. And we've also got
Kafka on Azure. This is
much more, much more custom
than just what we did
in the old days, which
was put a bunch of
stuff in a SQL server
table, and then read it
from somewhere else like that
doesn't scale very much in
a distributed system. Does it?
It does not because we
have this problem of needing
to collect data from different
sources. It can be a
database or like a database
table that populates with different
speed, or we can have
events that come in from
various systems. So, and we
need to somehow integrate these
multiple sources. And if we
do it by writing separate
thesis for each of them,
it becomes unmanageable. And then
we have to basically write
the same code for every
system, not the same, but
similar code for our systems.
And when we have to
solve problems, like your ability,
scalability, where they're all solved
in Kafka, if you learn
how to use it, you'll
be able to basically have
a reliable, scalable commit log
of events that you don't
have to consume right away,
because it's durable. It has
that retention period, and it
can have a flexible number
of consumers and it solves
all the problems that appear
in the multiple event, multiple
data sources problem. It seems
like, and, and I'll put
some words in your mouth
and you tell me if
this is correct, that you're
an advocate in distributed systems
of definitely not reinventing the
wheel. Like if there's a
problem, you don't need to
necessarily write that yourself. There's
something that will do it.
That is true because there
are a lot of systems
that already solve really hard
problems. You can try, you
can try to solve it
yourself, but you will notice
the pattern that other tools
already implement. And if you
look into the code, you'll
see that it is not
very trivial. So like when
you look at the websites
of the most popular databases
or distributed systems, do you
see that they say it
fall tolerance, scalable, fast, low
latency. And all of these
words are very abstract. So
you know that they are
good. They mean that your
system is cool for you.
They mean different things. So
there are there's, there is
a lot of non triviality
in how it is implement
it. So there is consensus
algorithms to make sure that
your events and next step
of your replication or anything
that requires coordination is performed
in order. And there are
no conflicts. There is configuration
exchange for, there are things
like gossip and algorithms for
metadata exchange, like the Sandra
cluster uses or yak. And
there are many other things
to ensure that your consistency
across the cluster is correct
because there are mistakes in
replication, and sometimes we have
to fix them. So we
need to know about things
like hint attend off or
read pair or on tie
entropy repairs. So, and when
you go and serve through
the internet for how to
do this and that you
basically are sucked into bunch
of distributed system papers that
are very formal and hard
to read, but then you
start to realize that all
of this existing solutions already
implement them and, you know,
started noticing patterns and see
that this word like fault
tolerance actually means these algorithms.
So if you create a
new distributed systems that does
not implement something that is
already implemented, then you will
have to know all of
these things. That's very well
said. I appreciate that. Thanks
so much for chatting with
me today. Thank you. Folks
can check out lena@twitterdotcomslashlinadroidandlenagithub.io. She's
got a ton of great
information on distributed systems and
Azure and large scale and
functional programming. And I appreciate
you. Thanks so much. Thanks.
This has been another episode
of Hansel minutes, and we'll
see you again next week.